.\" ** You probably do not want to edit this file directly **
.\" It was generated using the DocBook XSL Stylesheets (version 1.69.1).
.\" Instead of manually editing it, you probably should edit the DocBook XML
.\" source for it and then use the DocBook XSL Stylesheets to regenerate it.
.TH "CALLGRIND ANNOTATE" "1" "08/19/2009" "Release 3.5.0" "Release 3.5.0"
.\" disable hyphenation
.nh
.\" disable justification (adjust text to left margin only)
.ad l
.SH "NAME"
callgrind_annotate \- post\-processing tool for the Callgrind
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.HP 19
\fBcallgrind_annotate\fR [\fIoptions\fR] [\fIcallgrind\-out\-file\fR\ [\fIsource\-files\fR...]]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
\fBcallgrind_annotate\fR
takes an output file produced by the Valgrind tool Callgrind and prints the information in an easy\-to\-read form.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
\fB\-h \-\-help\fR
Show summary of options.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Show version of callgrind_annotate.
.TP
\fB\-\-show=A,B,C [default: all]\fR
Only show figures for events A,B,C.
.TP
\fB\-\-sort=A,B,C\fR
Sort columns by events A,B,C [event column order].
.TP
\fB\-\-threshold=<0\-\-100> [default: 99%] \fR
Percentage of counts (of primary sort event) we are interested in.
.TP
\fB\-\-auto=<yes|no> [default: no] \fR
Annotate all source files containing functions that helped reach the event count threshold.
.TP
\fB\-\-context=N [default: 8] \fR
Print N lines of context before and after annotated lines.
.TP
\fB\-\-inclusive=<yes|no> [default: no] \fR
Add subroutine costs to functions calls.
.TP
\fB\-\-tree=<none|caller|calling|both> [default: none] \fR
Print for each function their callers, the called functions or both.
.TP
\fB\-I, \-\-include=<dir> \fR
Add
\fBdir\fR
to the list of directories to search for source files.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
valgrind(1),
\fI$INSTALL/share/doc/valgrind/html/index.html\fR
or
\fIhttp://www.valgrind.org/docs/manual/index.html\fR.
.SH "AUTHOR"
.PP
Josef Weidendorfer <Josef.Weidendorfer@gmx.de>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Philipp Frauenfelder <pfrauenf@debian.org>.
