.\" ** You probably do not want to edit this file directly **
.\" It was generated using the DocBook XSL Stylesheets (version 1.69.1).
.\" Instead of manually editing it, you probably should edit the DocBook XML
.\" source for it and then use the DocBook XSL Stylesheets to regenerate it.
.TH "CG_ANNOTATE" "1" "08/19/2009" "Release 3.5.0" "Release 3.5.0"
.\" disable hyphenation
.nh
.\" disable justification (adjust text to left margin only)
.ad l
.SH "NAME"
cg_annotate \- post\-processing tool for Cachegrind
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.HP 12
\fBcg_annotate\fR [\fIoptions\fR] \fIcachegrind\-out\-file\fR [\fIsource\-files\fR...]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
\fBcg_annotate\fR
takes an output file produced by the Valgrind tool Cachegrind and prints the information in an easy\-to\-read form.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
\fB\-h \-\-help \fR
Show the help message.
.TP
\fB\-\-version \fR
Show the version number.
.TP
\fB\-\-show=A,B,C [default: all, using order in cachegrind.out.<pid>] \fR
Specifies which events to show (and the column order). Default is to use all present in the
\fIcachegrind.out.<pid>\fR
file (and use the order in the file). Useful if you want to concentrate on, for example, I cache misses (\fB\-\-show=I1mr,I2mr\fR), or data read misses (\fB\-\-show=D1mr,D2mr\fR), or L2 data misses (\fB\-\-show=D2mr,D2mw\fR). Best used in conjunction with
\fB\-\-sort\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-sort=A,B,C [default: order in cachegrind.out.<pid>] \fR
Specifies the events upon which the sorting of the function\-by\-function entries will be based.
.TP
\fB\-\-threshold=X [default: 99%] \fR
Sets the threshold for the function\-by\-function summary. Functions are shown that account for more than X% of the primary sort event. If auto\-annotating, also affects which files are annotated.
.sp
Note: thresholds can be set for more than one of the events by appending any events for the
\fB\-\-sort\fR
option with a colon and a number (no spaces, though). E.g. if you want to see the functions that cover 99% of L2 read misses and 99% of L2 write misses, use this option:
.sp
\fB\-\-sort=D2mr:99,D2mw:99\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-auto=<no|yes> [default: no] \fR
When enabled, automatically annotates every file that is mentioned in the function\-by\-function summary that can be found. Also gives a list of those that couldn't be found.
.TP
\fB\-\-context=N [default: 8] \fR
Print N lines of context before and after each annotated line. Avoids printing large sections of source files that were not executed. Use a large number (e.g. 100000) to show all source lines.
.TP
\fB\-I<dir> \-\-include=<dir> [default: none] \fR
Adds a directory to the list in which to search for files. Multiple
\fB\-I\fR/\fB\-\-include\fR
options can be given to add multiple directories.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
valgrind(1),
\fI$INSTALL/share/doc/valgrind/html/index.html\fR
or
\fIhttp://www.valgrind.org/docs/manual/index.html\fR.
.SH "AUTHOR"
.PP
Nicholas Nethercote.
